# Enhancing Disease Detection with Machine and Deep Learning: Analyzing Chest X-rays for Pneumonia and Atelectasis Identification

### Abstract
Machine learning is a useful Artificial Intelligence (AI) tool that can help a lot in the medical field for obtaining an accurate prediction in test or laboratory results and give healthcare professionals a better understanding of the patients’ conditions before diagnosis. Deep Learning (DL) is another technique which makes use of advanced learning techniques and algorithms which can help to give a better output in certain cases. From using x-rays, CT, MRI, PET scan images, to using different signal and text datasets, an easier understanding of different diseases and their physical, mental and social conditions can be well understood using various ML and DL techniques and algorithms, such as k-Nearest Neighbors (kNN), Transfer Learning, Decision Tree methods like AdaBoost, Random Forest, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) like AlexNet and DenseNet, Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), etc. In this work, the area of interest lies in using chest x-ray (CXR) images, which depicts two major disease conditions – Pneumonia and Atelectasis. Atelectasis-infected patients would have smaller or disproportionate lungs due to the fall of the alveolar sac found in them. Hence, the lungs appear to be smaller than they are supposed to be. While in Pneumoniainfected patients, there are white patches found inside the pulmonary organs in the x-rays.

### INTRODUCTION
Chest X-rays (CXR) are a medical imaging technology that is a crucial tool used in the field of medicine to diagnose patients after evaluating them thoroughly and detecting various lung diseases and provide immediate treatment as early as possible. Various machine learning models like Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN), Transfer Learning, Ensemble Learning etc. are used to help in detecting and analyzing these chest x-rays for a quick and easy way of detecting crucial pulmonary diseases, such as Pneumonia, COVID 19, Tuberculosis, Atelectasis, Pneumothora, Bronchitis, Pulmonary Edema, Fibrosis, and many others. CXRs are economically well worthy since they are a great way of detecting pulmonary diseases. Inflammatory diseases that affect the lung are easily detected when small white patches are found on the x-ray. However, even experienced radiologists find it difficult to diagnose patients as vague resemblance and appearance to each other. 

Machine learning is used and developed to make the diagnosis quicker and easier for radiologists, thereby encouraging researchers to build a fully automatic system that assists radiologists and pulmonologists to serve the purpose in resource-constricted remote places. Each machine learning model can be trained and programmed to detect these pulmonary diseases and are helpful. With advancements in deep learning techniques, fundamental characteristics can be extracted from the medical image data by checking on images than traditional recognition machine algorithms. 

Certain techniques are helpful when used since it doesn’t make use of the entire CXR image, which may lead to false diagnosis and treatment. The method considered in this case can be segmenting ROI selection technique. This system can be of great use in rural places where population density is more than the number of healthcare professionals in the given area. Automated computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) is becoming popular nowadays. Other special methods used for early detection include a form of abnormality detection, different classifiers, and some afore mentioned algorithms, while lung segmentation shows ample improvement in the accuracy of abnormality detection.

